Bullet dodging game (#267)
bitprj/devrel: Bullet-dodging game/Bullet-Dodging Game in Processing.md

# Bullet-Dodging Game in Processing

> Processing is an open-source graphical library that uses the Java language. Designed for the visual arts community, Processing can be used to create interactive graphics such as data visualizations, digital art, and video games. In this blog, we're going to build a simple bullet-dodging game from scratch in Processing. All of the built-in functions mentioned below can be found on the [Processing reference page](https://processing.org/reference/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Processing is an open-source graphical library written in Java. Designed for the visual arts community, Processing can be used to create interactive graphics such as data visualizations, digital art, and video games. In this blog, we're going to build a simple bullet-dodging game from scratch using Processing. All of the built-in functions mentioned below can be found on the [Processing reference page](https://processing.org/reference/).

```

## Table of contents:

* [Part I: Getting Started](#part-i:-getting-started)
* [Part II: Adding the Player and the Bullets](#part-ii:-adding-the-player-and-the-bullets)

* [Part III: Adding a Life and Scoring System](#part-iii:-adding-a-life-and-scoring-system)

* [Part IV: Adding Enemies and Shooting](#part-iv:-adding-enemies-and-shooting)

* [Part V: Implementing More Subclasses](#part-v:-implementing-more-subclasses)

* [Part VI: Adding Images](#part-vi:-adding-images)

* [Part VII: Adding Obstacles](#part-vii:-adding-obstacles)

* [Part VIII: Pausing and Restarting the Game](#part-viii:-pausing-and-restarting-the-game)

> ## Part I: Getting Started

Reviewer: consider adding a way to preview the app you're going to build throughout the tutorial, would make the descriptions in this section and on easier to visualize. just a link to a running version should suffice

Author: Yeah. It would be nice if I could directly show the program in the blog, but looks like those online editors that I could find are not compatible with Processing. I have inserted a few more images to better visualize the blog. Do you have any other alternatives?

If we run the program by pressing the Run button on the upper left corner (or Ctrl + R), a small canvas with the default size will appear.

![](images/editor1.png)

First, let's use `size()` and `background()` and to set up the size and color of our canvas. The `size()` function takes two arguments--width and height, whereas the `background()` function can take either RGB or the gray parameter (0-255, where 0 means black and 255 means white) depending on the number of arguments. Since the canvas size will stay the same, we should put `size()` in the `setup()` function. On the other hand, since we will clear the contents of the window and redraw the screen each time `draw()` is called, `background()` should be put at the beginning of the `draw()` function.

![](images/editor2.png)

## Part II: Adding the Player and the Bullets

> Now that the canvas has been set up, let's add the player on the screen. For simplicity, let's temporarily represent the player using `circle()`.

Reviewer: you have absolutely not set up the canvas at this point...

if you want this to be a follow-along blog, I would add a section above with screenshots for setting up and using the P3 system. Don't expect people to be able to get started with it on their own, and even then make sure they have some started code with the structure you described above in place

if you want this to be an informative blog and not follow-along, then you would need to remove the large amounts of explicit code samples below and add them to a resource dump or source file reference at the end

Author: I'm sorry for the image rendering issue, but I do have two screenshots showing how to up the canvas. I have also modified the previous section a little bit. Hopefully this will make the setup procedure clearer.

About the blog preference, the setup part isn't long enough for an individual blog, and I think setting up the environment isn't too complicated. Still, the entire blog seems to have too much information, so would it be a good idea to split it into two at somewhere else, say, after the third section?

    if (ypos > height + size / 2) {  // reuse the bullets
      xpos = int(random(size, width - size));
      ypos = - size / 2;
    }
  }

  void show() {
    fill(255);
    stroke(255, 0, 0);
    strokeWeight(5);
    circle(xpos, ypos, size);
    noStroke();
  }

  boolean check_collision() {
    if (dist(xpos, ypos, player.xpos, player.ypos) < (size + player.size) / 2) {
      return true;
    }
    return false;
  }
}
```

We can now declare an array of Bullet at the top of the code as global variables:

```
int MAX_BULLET = 25;
Bullet bullets[] = new Bullet[MAX_BULLET];
```

Let's initialize the bullets with varying initial vertical positions in `setup()`:

```
for (int i = 0; i < MAX_BULLET; i++) {
  bullets[i] = new Bullet(- i * height / MAX_BULLET);
}
```

Then we can `update()`, `show()` and `check_collision()` in `draw()`:

```
for (int i = 0; i < MAX_BULLET; i++) {
  bullets[i].update();
  bullets[i].show();
  if (bullets[i].check_collision()) {
    exit();
  }
}
```

We haven't dealt with the case when the bullet hits the player, but at least we already have a rather primitive version of the game to play now.

## Part III: Adding a Life and Scoring System

> Without a second chance, however, the player in our initial version of the game seems prone to death. So let's add a life system to make the game more enjoyable.

Reviewer: weird sentence to start a section. something like, "we want to allow the player to have multiple chances in our game, otherwise..."

  heart2 = loadImage("heart2.png");
  player = new Player();
  life = new Life();
  for (int i = 0; i < MAX_BULLET; i++) {
    bullets[i] = new Bullet(- i * height / MAX_BULLET);
  }
}

void draw() {
  background(255);      // white background
  player.update();
  player.show();
  for (int i = 0; i < MAX_BULLET; i++) {
    bullets[i].update();
    bullets[i].show();
    if (bullets[i].check_collision()) {
      hp --;
      bullets[i].ypos = - bullets[i].size;
      if (hp == 0) {
        exit();
      }
    }
  }
  life.show();
  if (life.check_collision()) {
    life = new Life();
  }
  show_status();
  score ++;
}

void show_status() {
  fill(255);
  stroke(0);
  strokeWeight(3);
  rect(80, 28, 145, 27, 5);
  image(heart1, 20, 19, 45, 45);
  fill(255, 0, 0);
  noStroke();
  rect(82, 30, 142 * hp / MAX_HP, 24, 3);
  fill(0);
  strokeWeight(5);
  textSize(24);
  text(hp + " / 6", 125, 50);  
  text("Score: " + score, 1000, 50);
}
```

## Part IV: Adding Enemies and Shooting

We have already implemented all the essential functions of a simple bullet-dodging game. If you're ready for a more advanced program, it is now time to add enemies to the game and make it a shooting game.

> First of all, it is imperative that we declare a global time variable `int time = 0;` and increment it (`time ++;`) at the end of `draw()`, so that we can decide when the enemy will fire the next bullet regularly.

Reviewer: "imperative" is a bit too strong of a word here, rephrase

> We would like to have different kinds of enemies shooting different kinds of bullets, so we will abandon our previous Bullet class as well as the bullet array. Instead, let's first define the following two abstract classes--Bullet and Enemy--which requires support for the basic functions such as `update()` and `show()`. Each subclass will have its own attributes--size, speed, etc.

Reviewer: use em- or en-dashes instead of double hypens

```
abstract class Bullet {
  int size, speed, damage;
  float xpos, ypos, xspeed, yspeed;

  // decrement hp and return true if the bullet hits the player
  boolean check_collision() {
    if (dist(xpos, ypos, player.xpos, player.ypos) < player.size / 2) {
      hp -= damage;
      return true;
    }
    return false;
  }

  abstract boolean update();  // update the position of the bullet
  abstract void show();  // draw the bullet on the screen
}

abstract class Enemy {
  int size, speed, max_hp, hp, appear_time = time;
  float xpos, ypos;
  
  // draw the hp bar above the enemy
  void show_hp() {
    fill(255);
    stroke(0);
    strokeWeight(2);
    rect(xpos - 60, ypos - 100, 120, 10);  // total hit points
    noStroke();
    fill(255, 0, 0);
    rect(xpos - 59, ypos - 99, 119 * hp / max_hp, 8); // remaining hit points
  }

  abstract void update();  // update the position of the bullet
  abstract void show();    // draw the enemy on the screen
  abstract void shoot();   // fire a bullet
}
```

> Abstract classes cannot be instantiated, we are able to create arrays holding objects of their subclasses:

Reviewer: these are lists, not arrays, one of the code or the descriptions need to be updates

      // if the bullet touches an enemy, decrement its hp, increment the number of bullets that hit the target
      if (dist(xpos, ypos, e.xpos, e.ypos) < (size + e.size) / 2) {
        e.hp --;
        // if the enemy's hp is reduced to zero, remove it from the array, increment the score and the number of enemies destroyed
        if (e.hp == 0) {
          score += 500;
          itr.remove();
        }
        return true;  // return true so that the bullet will be removed from the bullet array
      }
    }
    return false;
  }
}
```

Similar to the bullets and enemies array, we need to iterate through the my_bullet array in `draw()` to update the player's bullets:

```
// update and draw all the existing bullets shot by the player; remove the bullet that has hit the enemies or the boundary
itr = my_bullets.iterator();
while (itr.hasNext()) {
  My_Bullet b = (My_Bullet)itr.next(); 
  if (b.update()) {
    itr.remove();
  } else {
    b.show();
    if (b.check_hit()) {
      itr.remove();
    }
  }
}
```

To shoot a bullet, we first need to add a `shoot()` function to the Player class:

```
void shoot() {
  my_bullets.add(new My_Bullet(xpos, ypos));
}
```

> Finally, we need to resort to the `MousePressed()` function, which is called once after every time a mouse button is pressed. By calling `player.shoot()` in `mousePressed()`, a bullet will be shot towards the position of the cursor whenever the player presses the mouse.

Reviewer: "we need to resort to" is an odd way to write this, rephrase

    } else {
      b.show();
      if (b.check_collision()) {
        itr.remove();
        if (hp <= 0) {
          hp = 0;
          exit();
        }
      }
    }
  }
  // update and draw all the existing enemies
  itr = enemies.iterator(); 
  while (itr.hasNext()) {
    Enemy e = (Enemy)itr.next();
    e.update();
    e.show();
  }
  // update and draw all the existing bullets shot by the player; remove the bullet that has hit the enemies or the boundary
  itr = my_bullets.iterator();
  while (itr.hasNext()) {
    My_Bullet b = (My_Bullet)itr.next(); 
    if (b.update()) {
      itr.remove();
    } else {
      b.show();
      if (b.check_hit()) {
        itr.remove();
      }
    }
  }
  show_status();
  score ++;
  time ++;
}

void show_status() {
  fill(255);
  stroke(0);
  strokeWeight(3);
  rect(80, 28, 145, 27, 5);
  image(heart1, 20, 19, 45, 45);
  fill(255, 0, 0);
  noStroke();
  rect(82, 30, 142 * hp / MAX_HP, 24, 3);
  fill(0);
  strokeWeight(5);
  textSize(24);
  text(hp + " / 6", 125, 50);  
  text("Score: " + score, 1000, 50);
}

// the player fires a bullet when the mouse is pressed
void mousePressed() {
  player.shoot();
}
```

## Part VI: Adding Images

> 

Reviewer: "replace the ugly circles" can be rephrased

        total ++;
        itr.remove();
      }
    }
  }
  show_status();
  score ++;
  time ++;
}

void show_status() {
  fill(255);
  stroke(0);
  strokeWeight(3);
  rect(80, 28, 145, 27, 5);
  image(heart1, 20, 19, 45, 45);
  fill(255, 0, 0);
  noStroke();
  rect(82, 30, 142 * hp / MAX_HP, 24, 3);
  fill(0);
  strokeWeight(5);
  textSize(24);
  text(hp + " / 6", 125, 50);
  if (hp <= 2) {
    fill(255, 0, 0);
    textSize(42);
    text("!", 240, 55);
  }
  
  fill(255);
  stroke(0);
  strokeWeight(3);
  rect(80, 83, 145, 27, 5);
  image(bullet1, 15, 70, 55, 55);
  fill(60, 60, 255);
  noStroke();
  rect(82, 85, 142 * bullet_num / MAX_BULLET, 24, 3);
  fill(0);
  strokeWeight(5);
  textSize(24);
  text(bullet_num + " / 60", 110, 105);
  if (bullet_num <= 20) {
    fill(0, 0, 255);
    textSize(42);
    text("!", 240, 111);
  }
  
  fill(0);
  textSize(42);
  text("Score: " + score, 900, 100);
  textSize(25);
  text("Enemies Destroyed: " + enemies_destroyed, 900, 155);
  int accuracy = 0;
  if (total > 0) {
    accuracy = 100 * hit / total;
  }
  text("Accuracy: " + accuracy + "%", 900, 200);
}

void mousePressed() {
  player.shoot();
}
```

Here's the result:

> ![](images/image1.png)

Reviewer: this doesnt come up with anything... not sure if it's a rendering issue or what

    if (bounced == false) {
      bounced = true;
      xspeed = - xspeed;
      xpos += 2.5 * xspeed;
    } else {
      return true;
    }
  } else if (ypos <= size / 2 || ypos >= height - size / 2 ||
  (xpos > 500 - size / 2 && xpos < 700 + size / 2 && (abs(ypos - 700) < size / 2 || abs(ypos - 900) < size / 2))) {
    if (bounced == false) {
      bounced = true;
      yspeed = - yspeed;
      ypos += 2.5 * yspeed;
    } else {
      return true;
    }
  }
  return false;
}
```

Another small modification to our code is to prevent the heart icon from appearing within the obstacle. Otherwise, the player won't be able to collect it and a new icon will not appear elsewhere without the first one being touched first.

The solution to the problem is to reinitialize the position of the icon until it is generated outside the obstacle:

```
Life_Icon() {
  while(xpos > 500 && xpos < 700 && ypos > 700 && ypos < 900) {
    xpos = random(size / 2, width - size / 2);
    ypos = random(size / 2, height - size / 2);
  }
}
```

Now we have created an obstacle that the player can hide behind at the bottom of the field:

> ![](./images/image2.png)

Reviewer: likewise image issue

```
else if (state == 1) {  // during the game
  if (!pause) {  // perform all the functions when the game is not paused
  	// previous code in draw()
  } else {  // if the game is paused, stop updating any data
    fill(0);
    textSize(60);
    text("Press SPACE to resume", 270, 400);
  }
}    
```

Also, if the game is over, we can choose to print a message to the screen. We can also record the highest score by declaring a global variable `high_score == 0` initially.

```
// update the highest score
if (score > high_score) {
  high_score = score;
}
// dark background at the center of the screen
noStroke();
fill(0, 80);
rect(220, 270, 800, 400, 50);
// show game over and the highest score
fill(0);
textSize(60);
text("Game Over", 450, 380);
textSize(40);
text("High score: " + high_score, 445, 470);
textSize(60);
text("Press SPACE to restart", 300, 580);
```

After viewing the high score, we can now restart the game after game over!

> ![](images/image3.png)

Reviewer: same image issue

> 

Reviewer: since you've put in code dumps already, I would add a final one to the end here for people to compare against

> We have completed the ultimate version of the program that allows us to pause, resume, and restart the game in addition to all the functions we have implemented earlier. [Here](https://github.com/Bowen1Zhu/Bullet-Dodging-Game) are all the images that I have used in my shooting game. Feel free to customize your own characters, improve the aesthetics, and add more features to the game!

Reviewer: fix link to actually direct to images folder
